date = "2015-05-30"
# Butterflies and Existentialism


Some things make you old.

People might say having a regular schedule makes you so. Waking up on time and
going about the day’s business like clockwork, ticking away each passing moment
with pinpoint accuracy, marking out portions being well organized and
responsible. You know you're getting old when most of your conversations start
with "Oh, those were the days..." or "I remember this used to cost so little
back then...". You know you're old when you cannot stand dirty laundry any more,
or are no longer too lazy to do the dishes. We’ve actually been alive for more
years in the 21st century than the 20th.

Back when we were young, our years were ever so clearly marked out by the
streaming torrent of competitive academic and scholarly pursuits. Every year had
a clearly defined number of semesters with exams and we were lost in the race
hopping from one milestone to the next. It was like an audition: a tutorial, for
stuff that lay ahead. In its nascent stages, human brains tend to be most
impressionable and stuff we grasp into ourselves usually tends to hold on for
long amounts of time. In fact, the smallest of things: an idea, a preference, an
idiosyncrasy, can actually affect something much more than itself as we grow up.
The simplest of things and the smallest of habits sometimes cause manifestations
which no one might believe to be possible otherwise.

A funny example comes to mind. In my childhood, I used to absolutely love
sticking one end of a strand of Maggi noodles in my mouth leaving the other end
hanging outside: a long thread of noodle hanging down from the mouth. Then, I
used to suck on the strand quickly. Consequently, the hanging noodle's length
would shorten rapidly and it would rush into my mouth dancing around as it went
in. Now to ensure that such long strands survived in the final product, it was
critical that the Maggi units remained unbroken while cooking them. So, I let
then boil in water and unravel by themselves. While cooking Maggi the other day,
I realized that this behavior has become so ingrained in me, that it is
completely automatic for me not to break the units while cooking even today.
This, even though I stopped playing with noodle strands long ago. Now imagine
the collective entirety of such instances, such small preferences and
idiosyncrasies. Every single person would have their own set of beliefs and
choices that they made as children or the environment they grew in, which would
shape them into the way they are today. We've read around and seen evidences of
the often repeated "Man is but a product of his circumstances". But to grasp the
full meaning of it requires opening up our mind to the tiny little things that
metamorphose into huge portions of a person's character. Consider this
definition of the word "sonder" from [The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows][a]:

 >  Sonder n. the realization that each random passerby is living a life as vivid
 >  and complex as your own—populated with their own ambitions, friends, routines,
 >  worries and inherited craziness—an epic story that continues invisibly around
 >  you like an anthill sprawling deep underground, with elaborate passageways to
 >  thousands of other lives that you’ll never know existed, in which you might
 >  appear only once, as an extra sipping coffee in the background, as a blur of
 >  traffic passing on the highway, as a lighted window at dusk.

This “inherited craziness” is something which the tutorial years affect in us.
Unfortunately, our brains have not matured enough then and so, in a way, most of
what we are today has been shaped by events and choices which have not been in
our control. Now, to go back and take a different path is harder and harder, the
more you try to backtrack. Instances of such choices are not hard to find.

The choice of career can be considered one such instance. Most normal people are
utterly confused at the time of choosing what they want to do with their life,
hell they’re confused even after getting a degree. Usually, their decisions tend
to be influenced by peers and parents. The guy who was unsure – who compromised
and made an arbitrary decision – does stand to regret it later if he realizes
his true calling and sees that he can’t backtrack any more, at least not easily.
It takes real courage to follow your heart once you’ve made a proper investment
along a particular direction. Most won’t follow suit. I’ve had discussions with
my parents to this effect. What they ended up doing – what people in general end
up doing – has got a lot more to do with circumstance and environment than their
own choice. To a man who is the sole support for his family, his existing career
choice would pay off more than if he were to backtrack and start afresh – his
investments have been expensive. On the other hand, to someone already well off,
or to someone on whom pressures of family are not too great, it might pay just
as well to discontinue walking along their existing path and backtrack to take a
new one. People with huge inheritances, or (assuming a progressive Indian
mindset) even women could fall into this category. In general, familial
pressures tend to fall heavily on the shoulders of the man, and the lady of the
house can theoretically choose to pursue what she pleases. Of course, this
assumes a reasonably idealistic and progressive society. Unfortunately, this is
often not the case since even today, the married woman is often required to stay
at home and leave her aspirations aside. This reflects in popular culture as
well, as I shall demonstrate shortly. But that is a topic for another time. In
any case, it cannot be doubted that backtracking in general is difficult and
there are few who actually manage it.

 >  Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,<br>
 >  And sorry I could not travel both<br>
 >  And be one traveler, long I stood<br>
 >  And looked down one as far as I could<br>
 >  To where it bent in the undergrowth;<br>
 ><br>
 >  Then took the other, as just as fair,<br>
 >  And having perhaps the better claim,<br>
 >  Because it was grassy and wanted wear;<br>
 >  Though as for that the passing there<br>
 >  Had worn them really about the same,<br>
 ><br>
 >  And both that morning equally lay<br>
 >  In leaves no step had trodden black.<br>
 >  Oh, I kept the first for another day!<br>
 >  Yet knowing how way leads on to way,<br>
 >  I doubted if I should ever come back.<br>
 ><br>
 >  I shall be telling this with a sigh<br>
 >  Somewhere ages and ages hence:<br>
 >  Two roads diverged in a wood, and I—<br>
 >  I took the one less traveled by,<br>
 >  And that has made all the difference[^1].<br>

Is it good then, to take the road less travelled by? Or maybe better to stick to
the beaten track? The choice is entirely personal.

Here is another such instance (which has recently been a rather heated ground
for discussion): to believe or not to believe in a higher power which directly
or indirectly affects life on earth in some way, or an entity which is
responsible for the creation of mankind as a whole. Opinions on these subjects
have been passed down to us from generations of ancestors, finally through our
parents. At a very young age, we are taught to pray and worship and believe that
our troubles have an end as there is He who works His magic from above and
handles out an equal share of happiness for everyone. Would we have believed
with so much ardent faith had we been as thoughtful and inquisitive then as we
are now? In fact, a majority of non-believers across the world agree at least on
this: had we been as mature then as we are now, or had this theory been proposed
to us now instead of then, there would exist a significantly less number of
believers indeed. Our ancestors would also have questioned this probably. There
are so many people in the world that an idea is extremely likely to take root in
more than one person at a time. Did they change their belief then, or did they
stand silently and bend to conform? Popular (Indian) culture at least tends to
provide evidence towards the latter. At least until the final years of the last
century, we were continuously fed instances of reward from God in return for our
good deeds and punishment for sins. Be it the return of the proverbial mother’s
eyesight through dedicated prayers in “Amar, Akbar, Anthony” or the typical
“Bhagwaan tumhe kabhi maaf nahi karega” (God will never forgive you). Oh and (by
the way) these are also the movies which enforce the role of the woman as the
home maker, which I have touched upon near the end of my previous point
regarding career. For instance, in Hum Saath Saath Hain, we get this “Jahaan
ghar ki ladies aur bacchiyaan hamein apne haathon se aur pyaar se khana khilaye,
wahi ghar ghar hai” (True home is the place where ladies and daughters of the
house feed us with their own hands with love)[^2]

Digging deeper, I’m sure we would obtain a lot more such instances to reiterate
the original point about man being a product of circumstances and decisions
taken early on, that tend to affect what he is today. Now, sometimes we get so
lost in the little world we’ve created for ourselves that we take these things
for granted and not question them any more. Although, it can be agreed that it
would be much simpler to live in blissful ignorance, still these things are what
make you grow as a person and knowing them will influence your thoughts,
opinions and would probably shape the way you’ll turn out to be, say twenty more
years from now.

One of the best subjects to illustrate this point is something which is
omnipresent in the mind of every twenty-something’s parent out here: marriage.
Unlike the last time we delegated our decisions to someone else, this time we
are in conscious control. This is the kind of decision which would affect the
next fifty odd years of our life. And our outlook and opinion today would be the
seed for what we become fifty years from now, just as our childhood has
influenced how we are today. Hence, there is a lot of pressure to fulfil our
important decisions in the most responsible manner possible. I’ve come across a
lot of discussions (on Quora and elsewhere) which bash arranged marriages in
favour of love marriages. While both sides do have their pros and cons[^3],
things get tricky for the arranged school of thought where unfamiliarity with
the “better half” for such a long term commitment starts causing jitters.
Considering how much our subsequent years depend on trust, mutual respect and
cooperation (and of course, love) that come with marriage, making an informed
decision seems imperative and to not simply rush into something just because
“society” expects us to. The simplest form of an idea today, will be an integral
part of our self in the future. It’s the flap of a butterfly.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Meta: I never used to think so much every time a new year arrived. This time was
different for some reason. Measuring time used to be so much easier, when things
were on tutorial mode and each tick was clearly marked out for us with love and
care. Now we have to rely on other means to tick through time. What marks an
year a year? Have we grown as persons in that time? Have we learnt something
new? What is it? Watching a life changing movie, reading a brilliant book, being
involved in an extraordinary project at work, some means of learning, some means
of growth, or simply a trip around the sun? Everyone makes their measurement
using their own tools. Whatever it is that marks our years today, we are surely
here to stay, and we are not getting any younger.

The audition is done. The game is on!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1]: Robert Frost's [The Road Not Taken](http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173536)
[^2]: [Pretentious Movie Reviews: Hum Saath Saath Hain](http://youtu.be/3UWDjBZ_Ncg?t=5m3s)
[^3]: Of course, neither is perfect as an end in itself, which can be the topic of another post or debate.

[a]: http://www.dictionaryofobscuresorrows.com/post/23536922667/sonder
